# February 9, 2024

## Rambles on Warehouses

The biggest barrier to any kind of modeling has always been getting access to the data. No matter where I've worked or who I've worked for there has always been one consistent pattern - data is highly localized and rarely standardized. As someone who wants nothing more than to jump in and start making sense of data this has always been kind of baffling. Wouldn't it make everyone's lives easier if standardized data warehouses existed? And of course it would. Innovation's life blood is connecting disparate kinds of information and the open source community, kaggles, and DIY world all show just how much innovation is lying latent in folks who just needed some access. So why don't these kinds of warehouses exist? I'd venture that it's because warehouses are pretty darn useless to the people who already have the data. 

Just think about it, when you're already in the middle of it, already on the job and you need access to data, what do you do? Well you just go ask for it. And because you probably already know the people, it's pretty easy to get your hands on it (at least relative to someone on the outside), and you probably get some personalized guidance about the data in the process. In other words, to the people collecting the data their "warehouse" already exists, it is their social network! 

Furthermore warehouses are always somewhat impersonal. They have to be in order to create standardization. Compare this to having your own personal database, organized exactly as makes sense to you, with all the other data you're in need of. Why on earth would you want to switch to something alien, relatively clunky, and largely out of your control? 

Those with the data have no need for warehouses because they already have wonderfully personalized and personable warehouses they've tuned to their own needs. 

Yet, as a result of this, accessing data is nigh impossible for folks on the outside. In order to establish a warehouse for oneself you have to go build a social network of your own. Now there's nothing wrong with building a social network. But consider the scalability of this. If you wanted to connect social behavior data with oceanographic data with weather data with fish behavior data with... you get the idea - at some point you're going to max out on your ability to build the networks for each of these. Furthermore there's an enormous amount of overhead in building each and every one of these networks so, instead of being able to quickly test out ideas, you'll have to commit, big time, to an idea before you even have access to the data needed to feel it out. 

So not having warehouses is a big disadvantage overall. But now imagine trying to get the folks with the data to contribute to your warehouse. They have no reason to because they've already got warehouses of their own! So here's what one has to do, one has to build an application that brings one or more capabilities that excite the folks with the data but in order to get access to the feature they have to upload their data to a collective warehouse. This is how you drive initial adoption. And then eventually when some kind of "critical mass" is hit the warehouse will start extending beyond the average social network and data owners will have a reason to buy into your warehouse as a warehouse alone. 

Now, personally, I'm about to embark on an adventure of building my own warehouse in order to try my hand a bunch of different modeling ideas. However, while I'm at it I might as well solve this issue as well. So as I go about gathering data from folks I'd like to find a way to build an application that makes them *want* to contribute more data to the warehouse I'm building so that the thing can start taking off on its own and I can make it possible for future outsiders like me to go to town on interesting environmental data. 

I would like to create an environmental DataBank.

## Next Steps

As far as the IBM work is concerned I'm currently waiting on getting my hands on some data so the following next steps apply largely to the DataBank.

- I'd like to start with the radiotag data so I've ordered a text on tagging methods just so I can better understand the data I'm going to be working with and archiving. 
- I've certainly setup databases before but I've not built a full data warehouse so I've got a book on datawarehousing on the way as well.
- As I start receiving data I'm going to do some "market research" to figure out what folks wish they could do with their data, points of pain in managing the data, etc. so I can start sorting out some features that would make a warehouse useful to those who don't need just another database. 